Hi and welcome back. In this video, we
will be using artificial intelligence
models to generate future trading
forecasts. Large language models like
Chad GPT use a powerful architecture
called the transformer to predict the
next word in a sentence. That's how they
generate such a human-like text. More
precisely, if we provide a sequence of
words, the model will look for the most
probable words that can complete this
sequence. But what if we apply that same
technology to financial markets? Instead
of predicting the next word, we predict
the next price or trend. And that's what
we will be exploring in this video. We
will walk through setting up a
transformer model in Python using
PyTorch, training it on historical price
data of the Euro US dollar, and using it
to predict future price movements. So
you will see how we can adapt the same
techniques that power large language
models like Chad GPT to our own trading
and investing strategies. I'm also
sharing the Python code I'll be using
today in a link in the description of
the video so you can download it, run
your own experiment and see how these
models work. Transformers first exploded
in popularity for natural language
processing tasks. Let's imagine you're
using a model like ChatgPT. You type in
a prompt and it responds by predicting
the most probable sequence of words. In
the background, transformers are
analyzing all the words or tokens in
your prompt, building something called
attention matrices that determine which
parts of the prompt are most important
and then generating the best possible
continuation of your text. This
attention mechanism is the key
innovation. A transformer uses several
heads or matrices, each looking at
different relationships in the sequence.
Think about a head as a matrix of
parameters providing the importance
value or weight of each word. If we're
talking about text, one attention head
might look, for example, at how nouns
connect to verbs, while another head
could track pronouns referencing earlier
subjects, and so on. By splitting
attention across multiple heads which
are basically matrices, the model can
track a wide variety of relationships
simultaneously. Now why is that relevant
for time series predictions like forex
or stock prices? Well, price data is
also a sequence just like text. But
instead of words, we have candle values
over time. In theory, a transformer can
be adapted so that instead of predicting
the next word, it predicts the next
price or a range of future prices. The
same concept of attention applies. Each
time step in the sequence can learn how
to weight the importance of previous
time steps. In other words, the model
learns which past price movements are
most relevant for forecasting the
future. In practical terms, we will feed
our past prices and any technical
indicators into the transformer. The
model will look across these historical
windows and figure out which signals
matter most. Then it outputs the most
probable next price or price sequence,
similarly to how CH GPT picks up the
most likely next words. Results can vary
depending on hyperparameters, data
quality, and market conditions. But
there's no doubt that transformers
represent a major leap forward for
advanced sequence modeling. They can
capture the long-term dependencies more
effectively than older architectures
like LSTMs or traditional recurrent
neural networks. And I decided to try
this on trading to try transformers on
trading data and share it here on
YouTube today. Now let's jump into the
code and see how these transformers work
for trading applications. Grab your
coffee, fire up your code editor and
let's get started. So this is our
Jupyter notebook. We will start by
installing torch pandas numpy
scikitlearn and ta or pandas ta for
technical analysis just to compute some
technical
indicators. Now we can start defining
some functions that we'll be using later
on in the program. So load forex data
that takes a CSV file. It reads a CSV
file, puts it into a data frame. uh
cleaning and casting to date time format
the uh GMT time column and then we're
sorting the value by date uh just in
case we're resetting the index and we
return the data frame. Second function
is adding technical indicators. It takes
the data frame and it computes the RSI
ballinger bands high and low the moving
average 20 and the moving average slope.
So that's just the difference between
the uh current moving average and the
previous one. Two different rows or two
consecutive rows. We apply some cleaning
filling missing values and then we
return the data frame with these
technical indicators. Now if you want to
enhance this part, this is where you can
add on your own indicators. Maybe you
want to add, I don't know, different
moving averages with different length,
the exponential moving average or any
other technical indicator that you want
to include in uh in your study so that
the transformer will read it and try to
understand the data or the price
movement based on these uh indicators.
For this video, I just kept it simple.
I'm using those two. So, I'm using all
three indicators. I'm using the RSI,
Ballinger bands, and the moving average.
Now this function select and scale
features will take the data frame and
the names of the features or the columns
we would like to include in our study.
We're going to uh take by default the
open high low close the RSI Ballinger
band high low moving average 20 and
moving average 20 slope. So that's the
slope of the moving average. And then
we're going to apply the minimum maximum
scaler to these features to these
columns. going to apply the uh fit
transform function with the uh scaler
the minimum maximum scaler on the data.
So what this does actually it will scale
the um uh the values of these columns in
between two boundaries so that no column
takes more importance or more weight.
Then from torch utils data we're going
to import data set and data loader and
we're going to define a new class forex
data set that inherits from data set.
This is basically preparing the uh data
so that it can be understood and read
well by the uh transformer
model and these parameters actually are
very important at this point. So the
sequence length is by default it's equal
to 60. That's how many rows we're going
to read. The transformer is going to
read before trying to predict the next
row. And then the prediction length is
one. So we're going to predict one
candle in the future. The feature
dimension by default it's equal to four.
But it can be changed to 9. I think 1 2
3 4 5 6 7 8 9. So we have nine features
at this point that we can choose to use
part of these or all of these at the
same time. And then the target column
index is three because we're going to
target the closing price. So what we're
going to predict is actually the closing
price of the very next candle. We're
just applying one candle in the future
for prediction length and then we're
going to predict the closing price of
that particular
candle. And then that's it. Actually
this is the data defined here and uh
we're going to uh define the x the
input. So that's the sequence that we're
looking to the cro closing prices
actually of the last 60 candles by
default. So that's the uh x part and the
y part the future price is the very next
uh candle closing price. So we're going
to put these as labels for the training.
The model will be uh looking at X but
also at Y values to learn and fit what
kind of sequences will yield what kind
of future price or closing prices and
then when we are validating or testing
the model we just provide the previous
sequences and then the model has to
guess the future price. So for the
training phase though we need to provide
the labels. This is called supervised
learning in uh machine learning.
And notice the return format is a torch
tensor. So we're not working with numpy
arrays anymore. We're just using torch
tensors because this is what we will be
um providing for the transformer neural
networks. Okay. And now we will define
our transformer model. So the class is
time series transformer. It inherits
from neural networks.module from torch.
And these are the parameters of the uh
transformer. So the feature size is
nine. Remember we have nine features by
default. Uh we have two hidden layers of
neural networks. We have a dmodel of 64.
Number of heads 8. The dimensional feed
forward is 256. Now if you have noticed
that 8 * 8 is 64. 64 * 4 is
256. And they are all multiples of two.
These are the rule of thumbs actually
followed by data scientists and AI
engineers while defining such kind of uh
neural network architectures. Now there
is no theory behind there is no clear
theory behind actually but these are
good values for this kind of study. Now
we can increase one of these but we
would have to increase the others. It's
not mandatory but it is recommended.
Then in order then in order to avoid
overfitting we have a dropout of 0.1.
Sequence length I've shortened it to 30
here instead of 60 to make things a bit
faster while training and using the
model. And the prediction length is
equal to one because we're predicting
just one step ahead not more than that.
So we're going to predict just one
value. Remember that in chat GPT it can
predict a sequence which is a sentence.
So you write five or six words and it's
going to uh predict the next six or
seven words. We're trying to predict
only one future value here to make it as
simple as possible. Now I will not go
through all the technical details here.
But this is where our transformer is
defined using PyTorch. So that's
basically the encoder here with all the
parameters. So the number of layers,
number of heads, the attention heads and
so on. Remember that we have mentioned
the attention mechanism and that was
actually published by Google I think
with the uh paper entitled attention is
all you need and this is the
architecture that was used by uh GPT
open AI and so on and so on. So the
number of heads is the number of
attention heads. We're going to use
eight and not more. So we could increase
these again just to um check the
relationships. Each head will focus on a
relationship of the price, the current
price and the previous prices or a
certain sequence of previous prices.
What comes before is basically reshaping
the data and preparing um the input of
the model. But then this is the model
and then we have the output of the model
right here. Again, I'll not go through
all these details. It might get boring
as a YouTube video, but the architecture
is summarized here for now as is. And
we're going to use this part for our
trading. Now, this is where we're going
to train the transformer model. To train
the model actually is let it read the
sequences of data, the closing prices
with all the uh input features, the nine
features, the RSI, the ballinger bands,
the moving average, the slope of the
moving average, and so on. and also
letting it read the future closing
price, the next step, just one step
ahead. Why? Because it's going to fit
the parameters of the neural networks.
It's going to learn from this data what
kind of sequence and what to expect,
what kind of sequences we could have and
what kind of future values we could
expect after these sequences. So in the
future whenever we have similar
sequences or similar patterns it's going
to know how to predict what's the most
probable next closing price and this is
where it's happening. It's in the train
transformer model function. This
function takes the model as a parameter
the value loader the learning rate 10 to
minus 3 number of epochs how many times
we're going to keep repeating for for
the learning uh process. So 20. And now
I'm training on the CPU. If you have a
GPU, you might want to switch this to a
GPU, but I've tried it on CPU. It's
working on mine. So I'm not going to
touch it for
now. Now, after training the model,
we're going to return the trained model.
So that function is going to train the
model on the data and it will it will
return actually the model. And now we
have to evaluate the model.
So to evaluate the model we need to
provide the model the trained model the
data so providing test loader so that's
basically the u data for uh for test for
testing then we have the scalar the
featured columns the target column which
is three the index of the target column
which is three because we're targeting
the closing price the window width which
is by default 10 so it could be 30 or 60
as you may have seen before the starting
index zero the prediction length is
still one and the device is still the uh
CPU and this function is actually going
to take the model a new set of data and
it's going to provide the model with the
a length of sequence 30 or 60 rows
depending on how we've trained the model
and then it's going to ask the model to
try to predict the very next value the
very next closing price it's going to
compare compare this price with the
ground trth price like what really
happened and what the model predicted
and we're going to compare these
together. So obviously it's going to
give us some metrics but mostly we're
going to plot the predicted closing
prices and the uh real closing prices
together. And now we have all the sets
of functions that we'll be uh using
actually to train and evaluate the
model. So you don't have to understand
all the details. I mean it takes a a
certain level of expertise and um to be
familiar with artificial intelligence,
machine learning, neural networks,
especially transformers. Actually these
are uh some kind of a recent
architecture. It's working for now. You
can copy and paste the functions and
this is where we're going to use the
functions. So this is the cell where we
call the functions, tune the parameters
and this is where you can apply your
modifications as well. So I'm loading a
Euro US dollar candlesticks 1 hour data
between 2020 and 2023. It's a CSV file.
I'm using the load forex data to load
this file and then I'm adding the
technical indicators using the function.
Now you can see how easy it is calling
the functions providing the data frame
and returning a data frame with just the
added and scaled uh technical
indicators. Actually they are not
scaled. will be scaling these in the
next function which is select and scale
features uh data frame. So I left it by
default it's going to scale the nine
features in the data frame the um target
then the target column index is equal to
feature columns dot index of the column
close and we're going to use this later
on. So then we have the sequence length
is equal to 30. So I'm overriding all
the default values that we've used
before. prediction length is still one.
We just want to make it as simple as
possible. You might want to adjust it to
three candles in the future or five
candles in the future, but it's going to
be a bit problematic to um uh to compare
and to evaluate with the future values.
Then we have the data set. We're going
to use the Forex data set uh that we've
defined uh before. and we provide all
the parameters the required parameters
that we have already then we split the
data into training size so that's 80% of
the CSV file euro US dollar that we have
10% for validation and another 10% for
the testing size so we have our data
we're splitting the rows into 80% of
these are going to be used to for the
learning phase of the model But then for
the validation we're going to check for
uh 10% of these uh of the data and then
the last 10% are for the test size. So
somehow we are letting the model learn
on a big chunk of the data but then
we're testing it on another 10% and
another 10% just to evaluate how the
model would perform on new and unseen
data during the training phase. Now I've
left this line here on purpose. Just
don't do this. This is where we're going
to split the data actually into 80% 10%
and 10%. But there are two ways of doing
this. Either we slice these
sequentially. So the first uh few rows
are the 80%. So these are the training
set and the next is the validation and
then the next is the test. But uh by
default in machine learning we have the
habit of random splitting. It means like
picking up 80% randomly picking up 80%
of the of the data points and then
randomly picking up another 10% and then
another 10% for the test set. But that's
not the way we should be doing it. Why?
Because in time series analysis the
sequence is very important. The way
things are changing together is very
important. We can't just pick points
from different places or from different
times of our data. This is not going to
uh provide good results. And moreover,
it's going to bias the results. Now, we
provide batch size. It's 32. Um the
train loader is we're going to use the
data loader for the training data set,
for the validation data set, and the
test data set. And then we create and
train a transformer model here. So we're
going to define a model time series
transformer that we have created. That's
a class that we have created uh
previously in this code. We provide the
parameters. And as you can see the
sequence length is equal to the one
defined here. So that's 30 for
now. Same for the prediction length as
well. It's equal to one. And if we have
a GPU, we're going to use it. Otherwise,
we're going to use a CPU. Uh trained
model is equal to we apply the train
transformer model. We provide the model
that we have just defined the um data,
the training data, the validation
loader, the learning rate, number of
epochs, and the device. And that's it.
So, this is going to take a bit of time
depending on how many epochs you're
going to uh use. So I had to stop it a
bit quickly just to get on with the
video, the recording and to show you how
we can use the evaluation. So then we
just have to call the evaluate model
function. We provide the trained model,
the test data, the scalar and so on. And
as you can see we have two curves. So
this one in blue is the real these are
the real closing prices and the orange
one are the predicted closing prices.
And at first you might say this is
working really great. I mean the uh
predicted closing prices are not very
far from the um real closing prices. But
if you look closely it looks like the
model is a bit copying what happened
before in the candle before that. So
take for example this predicted value
almost equal or a bit higher than the
previously real value. the previous real
value or even better if you take this
line here. So how things changed from
this point up to this point it's a copy
and paste of how things changed between
these two consecutive points. Same this
change here is translated into this
change here. Then the price dropped in
reality and the transformer also dropped
the price. Now, it might not be exactly
a copy and paste of what just happened
in the real price, but to me it actually
looks like the model is just copying how
the price is changing uh very recently
and just replicating this in the future
step. It's not really showing any
powerful predictive potential. Now, to
be fair, uh at the same time, we didn't
provide much for the model. Remember
that for the um technical indicators we
provided two or three technical
indicators, we provided the uh closing
prices and so on. So it's not enough to
actually come up with a prediction. And
the main reason neural networks always
fail in this task is because you have a
lot of noise in trading data. The price
is very jumpy. It's going up and down.
It's not showing clear patterns, no
repetitive patterns. And so any model
that would somehow capture the details
will capture noise and it's going to be
very hard for the model to make accurate
predictions because it's really drowned
and lost in the noise. It's trying to
fit noise basically more than trying to
fit a signal. This is why simpler models
tend to perform better in trading. Now
there's a lot to be improved in here.
First of all, adding the um more
technical indicators or custom
indicators if you want. Uh maybe
changing the sequence, maybe changing
some of these hyperparameters of the
model when you are training the when you
are training the model or evaluating the
model and so on. So it's a lot to be
done maybe testing this on stocks data
rather than forex data providing the
volume centralized volume data and so
on. So there's a lot you can change and
try to improve with. Don't forget to
download the code if you are interested
in this part and try to use it uh for
your own experiments. And that's it for
this one. I think it was one of the
hardest videos I struggled to explain
online, but I hope that it still brought
you some value and sparked your interest
in those in this kind of algorithms.
Until our next one, trade safe and see
you next time.